# CHAPTER 15

## Deprecation

*I love deadlines. I like the whooshing sound they make as they fly by.*

*—Douglas Adams*
All systems age. Even though software is a digital asset and the physical bits themselves don’t degrade, new technologies, libraries, techniques, languages, and other environmental changes over time render existing systems obsolete. Old systems require continued maintenance, esoteric expertise, and generally more work as they diverge from the surrounding ecosystem. It’s often better to invest effort in turning off obsolete systems, rather than letting them lumber along indefinitely alongside the systems that replace them. But the number of obsolete systems still running suggests that, in practice, doing so is not trivial. We refer to the process of orderly migration away from and eventual removal of obsolete systems as  deprecation.

Deprecation is yet another topic that more accurately belongs to the discipline of software engineering than programming because it requires thinking about how to manage a system over time. For long-running software ecosystems, planning for and executing deprecation correctly reduces resource costs and improves velocity by removing the redundancy and complexity that builds up in a system over time. On
the other hand, poorly deprecated systems may cost more than leaving them alone. While deprecating systems requires additional effort, it’s possible to plan for deprecation during the design of the system so that it’s easier to eventually decommission and remove it. Deprecations can affect systems ranging from individual function calls to entire software stacks. For concreteness, much of what follows focuses on code-level deprecations.

Unlike with most of the other topics we have discussed in this book, Google is still learning how best to deprecate and remove software systems. This chapter describes the lessons we’ve learned as we’ve deprecated large and heavily used internal systems. Sometimes, it works as expected, and sometimes it doesn’t, but the general problem of removing obsolete systems remains a difficult and evolving concern in the industry. This chapter primarily deals with deprecating technical systems, not end-user products. The distinction is somewhat arbitrary given that an external-facing API is just another sort of product, and an internal API may have consumers that consider themselves end users. Although many of the principles apply to turning down a public product, we concern ourselves here with the technical and policy aspects of deprecating and removing obsolete systems where the system owner has visibility into its use.

### Why Deprecate?

Our discussion of deprecation begins from the fundamental premise that code is a liability, not an asset. After all, if code were an asset, why should we even bother spending time trying to turn down and remove obsolete systems? Code has costs, some of which are borne in the process of creating a system, but many other costs are borne as a system is maintained across its lifetime. These ongoing costs, such as the operational resources required to keep a system running or the effort to continually update its codebase as surrounding ecosystems evolve, mean that it’s worth evaluating the trade-offs between keeping an aging system running or working to turn it down.

The age of a system alone doesn’t justify its deprecation. A system could be finely crafted over several years to be the epitome of software form and function. Some software systems, such as the LaTeX typesetting system, have been improved over the course of decades, and even though changes still happen, they are few and far between. Just because something is old, it does not follow that it is obsolete.
Deprecation is best suited for systems that are demonstrably obsolete and a replacement exists that provides comparable functionality. The new system might use resources more efficiently, have better security properties, be built in a more sustainable fashion, or just fix bugs. Having two systems to accomplish the same thing might not seem like a pressing problem, but over time, the costs of maintaining them both can grow substantially. Users may need to use the new system, but still have dependencies
that use the obsolete one.

The two systems might need to interface with each other, requiring complicated transformation code. As both systems evolve, they may come to depend on each other, making eventual removal of either more difficult. In the long run, we’ve discovered that having multiple systems performing the same function also impedes the evolution of the newer system because it is still expected to maintain compatibility with the old one. Spending the effort to remove the old system can pay off as the replacement system can now evolve more quickly.

Earlier we made the assertion that “code is a liability, not an asset.” If that is true, why have we spent most of this book discussing the most efficient way to build software systems that can live for decades? Why put all that effort into creating more code when it’s simply going to end up on the liability side of the balance sheet?

Code itself doesn’t bring value: it is the functionality that it provides that brings value. That functionality is an asset if it meets a user need: the code that implements this functionality is simply a means to that end. If we could get the same functionality from a single line of maintainable, understandable code as 10,000 lines of convoluted spaghetti code, we would prefer the former. Code itself carries a cost—the simpler the code is, while maintaining the same amount of functionality, the better.

Instead of focusing on how much code we can produce, or how large is our codebase, we should instead focus on how much functionality it can deliver per unit of code and try to maximize that metric. One of the easiest ways to do so isn’t writing more code and hoping to get more functionality; it’s removing excess code and systems that are no longer needed. Deprecation policies and procedures make this possible. 

Even though deprecation is useful, we’ve learned at Google that organizations have a limit on the amount of deprecation work that is reasonable to undergo simultaneously, from the aspect of the teams doing the deprecation as well as the customers of those teams. For example, although everybody appreciates having freshly paved roads, if the public works department decided to close down every road for paving simultaneously, nobody would go anywhere. By focusing their efforts, paving crews can get specific jobs done faster while also allowing other traffic to make progress. Likewise, it’s important to choose deprecation projects with care and then commit to following through on finishing them.

### Why Is Deprecation So Hard?

We’ve mentioned Hyrum’s Law elsewhere in this book, but it’s worth repeating its applicability here: the more users of a system, the higher the probability that users are using it in unexpected and unforeseen ways, and the harder it will be to deprecate and remove such a system. Their usage just “happens to work” instead of being “guaranteed to work.” In this context, removing a system can be thought of as the ultimate
change: we aren’t just changing behavior, we are removing that behavior completely! This kind of radical alteration will shake loose a number of unexpected dependents. 

To further complicate matters, deprecation usually isn’t an option until a newer system is available that provides the same (or better!) functionality. The new system might be better, but it is also different: after all, if it were exactly the same as the obsolete system, it wouldn’t provide any benefit to users who migrate to it (though it might benefit the team operating it). This functional difference means a one-to-one match between the old system and the new system is rare, and every use of the old system must be evaluated in the context of the new one.

Another surprising reluctance to deprecate is emotional attachment to old systems, particularly those that the deprecator had a hand in helping to create. An example of this change aversion happens when systematically removing old code at Google: we’ve occasionally encountered resistance of the form “I like this code!” It can be difficult to convince engineers to tear down something they’ve spent years building.
This is an understandable response, but ultimately self-defeating: if a system is obsolete, it has a net cost on the organization and should be removed. One of the ways we’ve addressed concerns about keeping old code within Google is by ensuring that the source code repository isn’t just searchable at trunk, but also historically. Even code that has been removed can be found again (see Chapter 17).

There’s an old joke within Google that there are two ways of doing things: the one that’s deprecated, and the one that’s not-yet-ready. This is usually the result of a new solution being “almost” done and is the unfortunate reality of working in a technological environment that is complex and fast-paced.

Google engineers have become used to working in this environment, but it can still be disconcerting. Good documentation, plenty of signposts, and teams of experts helping with the deprecation and migration process all make it easier to know whether you should be using the old thing, with all its warts, or the new one, with all its uncertainties.

Finally, funding and executing deprecation efforts can be difficult politically; staffing a team and spending time removing obsolete systems costs real money, whereas the costs of doing nothing and letting the system lumber along unattended are not readily observable. It can be difficult to convince the relevant stakeholders that deprecation efforts are worthwhile, particularly if they negatively impact new feature development. Research techniques, such as those described in Chapter 7, can provide concrete evidence that a deprecation is worthwhile.

Given the difficulty in deprecating and removing obsolete software systems, it is often easier for users to evolve a system in situ, rather than completely replacing it. Incrementality doesn’t avoid the deprecation process altogether, but it does break it down into smaller, more manageable chunks that can yield incremental benefits. Within Google, we’ve observed that migrating to entirely new systems is extremely expensive, and the costs are frequently underestimated. Incremental deprecation efforts accomplished by in-place refactoring can keep existing systems running while making it easier to deliver value to users.

### Deprecation During Design 

Like many engineering activities, deprecation of a software system can be planned as those systems are first built. Choices of programming language, software architecture, team composition, and even company policy and culture all impact how easy it will be to eventually remove a system after it has reached the end of its useful life.

The concept of designing systems so that they can eventually be deprecated might be radical in software engineering, but it is common in other engineering disciplines. Consider the example of a nuclear power plant, which is an extremely complex piece of engineering. As part of the design of a nuclear power station, its eventual decommissioning after a lifetime of productive service must be taken into account, even going so far as to allocate funds for this purpose. Many of the design choices in building a nuclear power plant are affected when engineers know that it will eventually need to be decommissioned.

Unfortunately, software systems are rarely so thoughtfully designed. Many software engineers are attracted to the task of building and launching new systems, not maintaining existing ones. The corporate culture of many companies, including Google, emphasizes building and shipping new products quickly, which often provides a disincentive for designing with deprecation in mind from the beginning. And in spite of the popular notion of software engineers as data-driven automata, it can be psychologically difficult to plan for the eventual demise of the creations we are working so hard to build.

So, what kinds of considerations should we think about when designing systems that we can more easily deprecate in the future? Here are a couple of the questions we encourage engineering teams at Google to ask:

- How easy will it be for my consumers to migrate from my product to a potential replacement?

- How can I replace parts of my system incrementally?

Many of these questions relate to how a system provides and consumes dependencies. For a more thorough discussion of how we manage these dependencies, see Chapter 16.

Finally, we should point out that the decision as to whether to support a project long term is made when an organization first decides to build the project. After a software system exists, the only remaining options are support it, carefully deprecate it, or let it stop functioning when some external event causes it to break. These are all valid options, and the trade-offs between them will be organization specific. A new startup with a single project will unceremoniously kill it when the company goes bankrupt, but a large company will need to think more closely about the impact across its portfolio and reputation as they consider removing old projects. As mentioned earlier, Google is still learning how best to make these trade-offs with our own internal and external products.

In short, don’t start projects that your organization isn’t committed to support for the expected lifespan of the organization. Even if the organization chooses to deprecate and remove the project, there will still be costs, but they can be mitigated through planning and investments in tools and policy.

### Types of Deprecation

Deprecation isn’t a single kind of process, but a continuum of them, ranging from “we’ll turn this off someday, we hope” to “this system is going away tomorrow, customers better be ready for that.” Broadly speaking, we divide this continuum into two separate areas: advisory and compulsory.

#### Advisory Deprecation

Advisory deprecations are those that don’t have a deadline and aren’t high priority for the organization (and for which the company isn’t willing to dedicate resources). These could also be labeled aspirational deprecations: the team knows the system has been replaced, and although they hope clients will eventually migrate to the new system, they don’t have imminent plans to either provide support to help move clients or delete the old system. This kind of deprecation often lacks enforcement: we hope that clients move, but can’t force them to. As our friends in SRE will readily tell you: “Hope is not a strategy.”

Advisory deprecations are a good tool for advertising the existence of a new system and encouraging early adopting users to start trying it out. Such a new system should not be considered in a beta period: it should be ready for production uses and loads and should be prepared to support new users indefinitely. Of course, any new system is going to experience growing pains, but after the old system has been  deprecated in any way, the new system will become a critical piece of the organization’s infrastructure.

One scenario we’ve seen at Google in which advisory deprecations have strong benefits is when the new system offers compelling benefits to its users. In these cases,simply notifying users of this new system and providing them self-service tools to migrate to it often encourages adoption. However, the benefits cannot be simply incremental: they must be transformative. Users will be hesitant to migrate on their own for marginal benefits, and even new systems with vast improvements will not gain full adoption using only advisory deprecation efforts.

Advisory deprecation allows system authors to nudge users in the desired direction, but they should not be counted on to do the majority of migration work. It is often tempting to simply put a deprecation warning on an old system and walk away without any further effort. Our experience at Google has been that this can lead to (slightly) fewer new uses of an obsolete system, but it rarely leads to teams actively
migrating away from it. Existing uses of the old system exert a sort of conceptual (or technical) pull toward it: comparatively many uses of the old system will tend to pick up a large share of new uses, no matter how much we say, “Please use the new system.” The old system will continue to require maintenance and other resources unless its users are more actively encouraged to migrate.