## Antipattern: Hire Pushovers

If you’re a manager and you’re feeling insecure in your role (for whatever reason), one way to make sure no one questions your authority or threatens your job is to hire people you can push around. You can achieve this by hiring people who aren’t as smart or ambitious as you are, or just people who are more insecure than you. Even though this will cement your position as the team leader and decision maker, it will mean a lot more work for you. Your team won’t be able to make a move without you leading them like dogs on a leash. If you build a team of pushovers, you probably can’t take a vacation; the moment you leave the room, productivity comes to a screeching halt. But surely this is a small price to pay for feeling secure in your job, right?

Instead, you should strive to hire people who are smarter than you and can replace you. This can be difficult because these very same people will challenge you on a regular basis (in addition to letting you know when you make a mistake). These very same people will also consistently impress you and make great things happen. They’ll be able to direct themselves to a much greater extent, and some will be eager to lead the team, as well. You shouldn’t see this as an attempt to usurp your power; instead, look at it as an opportunity for you to lead an additional team, investigate new opportunities, or even take a vacation without worrying about checking in on the team every day to make sure it’s getting its work done. It’s also a great chance to learn and grow—it’s a lot easier to expand your expertise when surrounded by people who are smarter than you.

## Antipattern: Ignore Low Performers

Early in my career as a manager at Google, the time came for me to hand out bonus letters to my team, and I grinned as I told my manager, “I love being a manager!” Without missing a beat, my manager, a long-time industry veteran, replied, “Some‐ times you get to be the tooth fairy, other times you have to be the dentist.”

It’s never any fun to pull teeth. We’ve seen team leaders do all the right things to build incredibly strong teams only to have these teams fail to excel (and eventually fall apart) because of just one or two low performers. We understand that the human aspect is the most challenging part of writing software, but the most difficult part of dealing with humans is handling someone who isn’t meeting expectations. Some‐ times, people miss expectations because they’re not working long enough or hard enough, but the most difficult cases are when someone just isn’t capable of doing their job no matter how long or hard they work.

Google’s Site Reliability Engineering (SRE) team has a motto: “Hope is not a strategy.” And nowhere is hope more overused as a strategy than in dealing with a low per‐ former. Most team leaders grit their teeth, avert their eyes, and just hope that the low performer either magically improves or just goes away. Yet it is extremely rare that
this person does either.

While the leader is hoping and the low performer isn’t improving (or leaving), high performers on the team waste valuable time pulling the low performer along, and team morale leaks away into the ether. You can be sure that the team knows the low performer is there even if you’re ignoring them—in fact, the team is acutely aware of who the low performers are, because they have to carry them.

Ignoring low performers is not only a way to keep new high performers from joining your team, but it’s also a way to encourage existing high performers to leave. You eventually wind up with an entire team of low performers because they’re the only ones who can’t leave of their own volition. Lastly, you aren’t even doing the low per‐ former any favors by keeping them on the team; often, someone who wouldn’t do well on your team could actually have plenty of impact somewhere else.

The benefit of dealing with a low performer as quickly as possible is that you can put yourself in the position of helping them up or out. If you immediately deal with a low performer, you’ll often find that they merely need some encouragement or direction to slip into a higher state of productivity. If you wait too long to deal with a low per‐ former, their relationship with the team is going to be so sour and you’re going to be so frustrated that you’re not going to be able to help them.

How do you effectively coach a low performer? The best analogy is to imagine that you’re helping a limping person learn to walk again, then jog, then run alongside the rest of the team. It almost always requires temporary micromanagement, but still a whole lot of humility, respect, and trust—particularly respect. Set up a specific time frame (say, two months) and some very specific goals you expect them to achieve in that period. Make the goals small, incremental, and measurable so that there’s an opportunity for lots of small successes. Meet with the team member every week to check on progress, and be sure you set really explicit expectations around each upcoming milestone so that it’s easy to measure success or failure. If the low per‐ former can’t keep up, it will become quite obvious to both of you early in the process. At this point, the person will often acknowledge that things aren’t going well and decide to quit; in other cases, determination will kick in and they’ll “up their game” to meet expectations. Either way, by working directly with the low performer, you’re catalyzing important and necessary changes.

## Antipattern: Ignore Human Issues

A manager has two major areas of focus for their team: the social and the technical. It’s rather common for managers to be stronger in the technical side at Google, and because most managers are promoted from a technical job (for which the primary goal of their job was to solve technical problems), they can tend to ignore human issues. It’s tempting to focus all of your energy on the technical side of your team because, as an individual contributor, you spend the vast majority of your time solving technical problems. When you were a student, your classes were all about learning the technical ins and outs of your work. Now that you’re a manager, however, you ignore the human element of your team at your own peril.

Let’s begin with an example of a leader ignoring the human element in his team. Years ago, Jake had his first child. Jake and Katie had worked together for years, both remotely and in the same office, so in the weeks following the arrival of the new baby, Jake worked from home. This worked out great for the couple, and Katie was totally fine with it because she was already used to working remotely with Jake. They were their usual productive selves until their manager, Pablo (who worked in a different office), found out that Jake was working from home for most of the week. Pablo was upset that Jake wasn’t going into the office to work with Katie, despite the fact that Jake was just as productive as always and that Katie was fine with the situation. Jake attempted to explain to Pablo that he was just as productive as he would be if he came into the office and that it was much easier on him and his wife for him to mostly work from home for a few weeks. Pablo’s response: “Dude, people have kids all the time. You need to go into the office.” Needless to say, Jake (normally a mild-mannered engineer) was enraged and lost a lot of respect for Pablo.

There are numerous ways in which Pablo could have handled this differently: he could have showed some understanding that Jake wanted to spend more time at home with his wife and, if his productivity and team weren’t being affected, just let him continue to do so for a while. He could have negotiated that Jake go into the office for one or two days a week until things settled down. Regardless of the end result, a little bit of empathy would have gone a long way toward keeping Jake happy in this situation.

## Antipattern: Be Everyone’s Friend

The first foray that most people have into leadership of any sort is when they become the manager or TL of a team of which they were formerly members. Many leads don’t want to lose the friendships they’ve cultivated with their teams, so they will some‐ times work extra hard to maintain friendships with their team members after becoming a team lead. This can be a recipe for disaster and for a lot of broken friendships. Don’t confuse friendship with leading with a soft touch: when you hold power over someone’s career, they might feel pressure to artificially reciprocate gestures of friendship.

Remember that you can lead a team and build consensus without being a close friend of your team (or a monumental hard-ass). Likewise, you can be a tough leader without tossing your existing friendships to the wind. We’ve found that having lunch with your team can be an effective way to stay socially connected to them without making them uncomfortable—this gives you a chance to have informal conversations outside the normal work environment.

Sometimes, it can be tricky to move into a management role over someone who has been a good friend and a peer. If the friend who is being managed is not selfmanaging and is not a hard worker, it can be stressful for everyone. We recommend that you avoid getting into this situation whenever possible, but if you can’t, pay extra attention to your relationship with those folks.

## Antipattern: Compromise the Hiring Bar

Steve Jobs once said: “A people hire other A people; B people hire C people.” It’s incredibly easy to fall victim to this adage, and even more so when you’re trying to hire quickly. A common approach I’ve seen outside of Google is that a team needs to hire 5 engineers, so it sifts through a pile of applications, interviews 40 or 50 people, and picks the best 5 candidates regardless of whether they meet the hiring bar.

This is one of the fastest ways to build a mediocre team.

The cost of finding the appropriate person—whether by paying recruiters, paying for advertising, or pounding the pavement for references—pales in comparison to the cost of dealing with an employee who you never should have hired in the first place. This “cost” manifests itself in lost team productivity, team stress, time spent managing the employee up or out, and the paperwork and stress involved in firing the employee. That’s assuming, of course, that you try to avoid the monumental cost of just leaving them on the team. If you’re managing a team for which you don’t have a say over hiring and you’re unhappy with the hires being made for your team, you need to fight tooth and nail for higher-quality engineers. If you’re still handed sub‐ standard engineers, maybe it’s time to look for another job. Without the raw materials for a great team, you’re doomed.

## Antipattern: Treat Your Team Like Children

The best way to show your team that you don’t trust it is to treat team members like kids—people tend to act the way you treat them, so if you treat them like children or prisoners, don’t be surprised when that’s how they behave. You can manifest this behavior by micromanaging them or simply by being disrespectful of their abilities and giving them no opportunity to be responsible for their work. If it’s permanently necessary to micromanage people because you don’t trust them, you have a hiring failure on your hands. Well, it’s a failure unless your goal was to build a team that you can spend the rest of your life babysitting. If you hire people worthy of trust and show these people you trust them, they’ll usually rise to the occasion (sticking with the basic premise, as we mentioned earlier, that you’ve hired good people).

The results of this level of trust go all the way to more mundane things like office and computer supplies. As another example, Google provides employees with cabinets stocked with various and sundry office supplies (e.g., pens, notebooks, and other “legacy” implements of creation) that are free to take as employees need them. The IT department runs numerous “Tech Stops” that provide self-service areas that are like a mini electronics store. These contain lots of computer accessories and doodads (power supplies, cables, mice, USB drives, etc.) that would be easy to just grab and walk off with an masse, but because Google employees are being trusted to check these items out, they feel a responsibility to Do The Right Thing. Many people from typical corporations react in horror to hearing this, exclaiming that surely Google is hemorrhaging money due to people “stealing” these items. That’s certainly possible, but what about the costs of having a workforce that behaves like children or that has to waste valuable time formally requesting cheap office supplies? Surely that’s more  expensive than the price of a few pens and USB cables.

# Positive Patterns

Now that we’ve covered antipatterns, let’s turn to positive patterns for successful lead‐ ership and management that we’ve learned from our experiences at Google, from watching other successful leaders and, most of all, from our own leadership mentors. These patterns are not only those that we’ve had great success implementing, but the patterns that we’ve always respected the most in the leaders who we follow.

## Lose the Ego

We talked about “losing the ego” a few chapters ago when we first examined humility, respect, and trust, but it’s especially important when you’re a team leader. This pattern is frequently misunderstood as encouraging people to be doormats and let others walk all over them, but that’s not the case at all. Of course, there’s a fine line between being humble and letting others take advantage of you, but humility is not the same as lacking confidence. You can still have self-confidence and opinions without being an egomaniac. Big personal egos are difficult to handle on any team, especially in the team’s leader. Instead, you should work to cultivate a strong collective team ego and identity.

Part of “losing the ego” is trust: you need to trust your team. That means respecting the abilities and prior accomplishments of the team members, even if they’re new to your team.

If you’re not micromanaging your team, you can be pretty certain the folks working in the trenches know the details of their work better than you do. This means that although you might be the one driving the team to consensus and helping to set the direction, the nuts and bolts of how to accomplish your goals are best decided by the people who are putting the product together. This gives them not only a greater sense of ownership, but also a greater sense of accountability and responsibility for the success (or failure) of their product. If you have a good team and you let it set the bar for the quality and rate of its work, it will accomplish more than by you standing over team members with a carrot and a stick.

Most people new to a leadership role feel an enormous responsibility to get every‐ thing right, to know everything, and to have all the answers. We can assure you that you will not get everything right, nor will you have all the answers, and if you act like you do, you’ll quickly lose the respect of your team. A lot of this comes down to having a basic sense of security in your role. Think back to when you were an individual contributor; you could smell insecurity a mile away. Try to appreciate inquiry: when someone questions a decision or statement you made, remember that this person is usually just trying to better understand you. If you encourage inquiry, you’re much more likely to get the kind of constructive criticism that will make you a better leader of a better team. Finding people who will give you good constructive criticism is incredibly difficult, and it’s even more difficult to get this kind of criticism from people who “work for you.” Think about the big picture of what you’re trying to accomplish as a team, and accept feedback and criticism openly; avoid the urge to be territorial.

The last part of losing the ego is a simple one, but many engineers would rather be boiled in oil than do it: apologize when you make a mistake. And we don’t mean you should just sprinkle “I’m sorry” throughout your conversation like salt on popcorn— you need to sincerely mean it. You are absolutely going to make mistakes, and whether or not you admit it, your team is going to know you’ve made a mistake. Your team members will know regardless of whether they talk to you (and one thing is guaranteed: they will talk about it with one another). Apologizing doesn’t cost money. People have enormous respect for leaders who apologize when they screw up, and contrary to popular belief, apologizing doesn’t make you vulnerable. In fact, you’ll usually gain respect from people when you apologize, because apologizing tells people that you are level headed, good at assessing situations, and—coming back to humility, respect, and trust—humble.

## Be a Zen Master

As an engineer, you’ve likely developed an excellent sense of skepticism and cynicism, but this can be a liability when you’re trying to lead a team. This is not to say that you should be naively optimistic at every turn, but you would do well to be less vocally skeptical while still letting your team know you’re aware of the intricacies and obstacles involved in your work. Mediating your reactions and maintaining your calm is more important as you lead more people, because your team will (both unconsciously and consciously) look to you for clues on how to act and react to whatever is going on around you.

A simple way to visualize this effect is to see your company’s organization chart as a chain of gears, with the individual contributor as a tiny gear with just a few teeth all the way at one end, and each successive manager above them as another gear, ending with the CEO as the largest gear with many hundreds of teeth. This means that every time that individual’s “manager gear” (with maybe a few dozen teeth) makes a single revolution, the “individual’s gear” makes two or three revolutions. And the CEO can make a small movement and send the hapless employee, at the end of a chain of six or seven gears, spinning wildly! The farther you move up the chain, the faster you can set the gears below you spinning, whether or not you intend to.

Another way of thinking about this is the maxim that the leader is always on stage. This means that if you’re in an overt leadership position, you are always being watched: not just when you run a meeting or give a talk, but even when you’re just sitting at your desk answering emails. Your peers are watching you for subtle clues in your body language, your reactions to small talk, and your signals as you eat lunch. Do they read confidence or fear? As a leader, your job is to inspire, but inspiration is a 24/7 job. Your visible attitude about absolutely everything—no matter how trivial—is unconsciously noticed and spreads infectiously to your team.

One of the early managers at Google, Bill Coughlan, a VP of engineering, had truly mastered the ability to maintain calm at all times. No matter what blew up, no matter what crazy thing happened, no matter how big the firestorm, Bill would never panic. Most of the time he’d place one arm across his chest, rest his chin in his hand, and ask questions about the problem, usually to a completely panicked engineer. This had the effect of calming them and helping them to focus on solving the problem instead of running around like a chicken with its head cut off. Some of us used to joke that if someone came in and told Bill that 19 of the company’s offices had been attacked by space aliens, Bill’s response would be, “Any idea why they didn’t make it an even 20?”

This brings us to another Zen management trick: asking questions. When a team member asks you for advice, it’s usually pretty exciting because you’re finally getting the chance to fix something. That’s exactly what you did for years before moving into a leadership position, so you usually go leaping into solution mode, but that is the last place you should be. The person asking for advice typically doesn’t want you to solve their problem, but rather to help them solve it, and the easiest way to do this is to ask this person questions. This isn’t to say that you should replace yourself with a Magic 8 Ball, which would be maddening and unhelpful. Instead, you can apply some humility, respect, and trust and try to help the person solve the problem on their own by trying to refine and explore the problem. This will usually lead the employee to the answer,6  and it will be that person’s answer, which leads back to the ownership and responsibility we went over earlier in this chapter. Whether or not you have the  answer, using this technique will almost always leave the employee with the impression that you did. Tricky, eh? Socrates would be proud of you.

## Be a Catalyst

In chemistry, a catalyst is something that accelerates a chemical reaction, but which itself is not consumed in the reaction. One of the ways in which catalysts (e.g., enzymes) work is to bring reactants into close proximity: instead of bouncing around randomly in a solution, the reactants are much more likely to favorably interact with one another when the catalyst helps bring them together. This is a role you’ll often need to play as a leader, and there are a number of ways you can go about it.

One of the most common things a team leader does is to build consensus. This might mean that you drive the process from start to finish, or you just give it a gentle push in the right direction to speed it up. Working to build team consensus is a leadership skill that is often used by unofficial leaders because it’s one way you can lead without any actual authority. If you have the authority, you can direct and dictate direction, but that’s less effective overall than building consensus.7  If your team is looking to move quickly, sometimes it will voluntarily concede authority and direction to one or more team leads. Even though this might look like a dictatorship or oligarchy, when it’s done voluntarily, it’s a form of consensus.

## Remove Roadblocks

Sometimes, your team already has consensus about what you need to do, but it hit a roadblock and became stuck. This could be a technical or organizational roadblock, but jumping in to help the team get moving again is a common leadership technique. There are some roadblocks that, although virtually impossible for your team members to get past, will be easy for you to handle, and helping your team understand that you’re glad (and able) to help out with these roadblocks is valuable.

One time, a team spent several weeks trying to work past an obstacle with Google’s legal department. When the team finally reached its collective wits’ end and went to its manager with the problem, the manager had it solved in less than two hours sim‐ ply because he knew the right person to contact to discuss the matter. Another time, a team needed some server resources and just couldn’t get them allocated. Fortunately, the team’s manager was in communication with other teams across the company and managed to get the team exactly what it needed that very afternoon. Yet another time, one of the engineers was having trouble with an arcane bit of Java code. Although the team’s manager was not a Java expert, she was able to connect the engineer to another  engineer who knew exactly what the problem was. You don’t need to know all the answers to help remove roadblocks, but it usually helps to know the people who do. In many cases, knowing the right person is more valuable than knowing the right answer.